Nuttssh - SSH-based virtual tunnel switchboard server
=====================================================
Nuttssh is a small Python-based SSH server that internally connects forwarded
ports between different SSH clients. It was designed to work as a way to
connect to machines running behind a NAT, by letting them initiate an outgoing
SSH connection and then piggy-back a reverse SSH connection to access the
machine. When used like that, Nuttssh acts somewhat as a very lightweight VPN
server.

More generally, nuttssh can be used to let SSH clients request opening a
listening port, which results in an internal virtual port being opened (no
actual TCP ports on the server are opened). Then another SSH client can request
to connect to that listening port, using a configurable name to identify the
client whose port to connect to.

This works very similar to using a normal SSH server with port forwarding,
except that when using Nuttssh:
 - No actual TCP ports are opened on the server.
 - Clients do not need to actually authenticate as a system user. Nuttssh
   handles its own key authentication.
 - When multiple clients request a listening port, they can use the same port
   number, since their hostname will be used to select the right one. This
   removes the need to ensure that each listening client chooses a unique port
   number.
 - When connecting to a listening port, a hostname and the regular port number
   (e.g. 22 for SSH) can be used, rather than having to keep track of which
   port number maps to which client.

To circumvent the downsides of normal SSH port forwarding (in particular the
last two), Nuttssh was created. It replaces the central server, while still
allowing normal SSH clients to be used.

Nuttssh still young, but should be usable already. There is still plenty of
room for improvement, especially with regard to configurability.

## Terminology
 - Nuttssh server: The central server that accepts connections from various
   hosts and connects them together.
 - Initiator: A host that connects to the Nuttssh server and requests
   listening ports by SSH remote port forwarding (`ssh -R`). 
 - Listener: A host that connects to the Nuttssh server
   and requests a connection to an initiator by SSH local port forwarding 
   (`ssh -L`).
 - Circuit: the virtual connection between two hosts through the Nuttssh
   server. Called a circuit to disambiguate from the normal connection between
   the client and the Nuttssh server.

   Note that a host is typically either listening or initiating, but given
   sufficient permissions,  a client could also act as both.

**NOTE**: This is a fork of the [original Nuttssh](https://github.com/matthijskooijman/nuttssh)
by Matthijs Kooijman. This version changes the default behavior to *trust any SSH key on connect*, 
adding it (with default permissions) to the authorized keys file. 
In addition, listeners can only connect to initiators by using the initiator alias, 
which is auto-generated by appending a random suffix to the username
supplied by the initiator upon connecting to nuttssh. 
This version also fixes some compatibility issues with AsyncSSH 2.3.0, adds
some additional configuration parameters, native Docker support.

## Installing / running
The easiest way to run Nuttssh is with Docker:

    docker build -t nuttssh .
    docker run --name nuttssh -p2222:2222 \
      -v $(pwd)/keys:/nuttssh/keys nuttssh_nuttssh

Host keys will be generated on first run and saved to the `keys` directory.

## Configuration
Configuration is through some globals at the top of `server.py` that can be
overridden with environment variables.

### Access control
To control access to the nuttssh server, an `authorized_keys` file must be
present. If it isn't, `nuttssh` will create a blank one. This file uses the same
format as OpenSSH's `authorized_keys` file. Each line must contain a single
public key (copied from e.g. the `id_rsa.pub` file). In front of the public
key, options can be added.

For example, a file could look like this (keys are truncated for the example):

    access="listen" ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAJnmVYPYe94v user@host
    access="listen",access="initiate",from="192.168.1.0/24" ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAA+ user@host

This consists of a comma-separated list of options, a keytype, the actual key
and a comment.

Currently, the following options are supported:
 - `access` to specify the permissions for the client. Supported values are
   `initiate` (to allow opening listening ports), `listen` (to allow
   connecting to listening ports), and `list` (to view all connected clients).
   This option can be specified more than once,
   to give more than one type of permission. New users are granted `initiate`
   and `listen` permissions by default.
 - `from` to limit connections to specific hosts. The value is a
   comma-separated list of patterns. Each pattern can be a glob pattern (using
   `*` and `?`, e.g.  `"*.mydomain.tld"`) matched against the address and
   hostname, or a CIDR-style address and mask (e.g.  `"192.168.1.0/24"`). A
   connection is allowed if it matches at least one of the patterns in the
   list. This option can be specified multiple times, in which case a
   connection must match (one element of) each `from` option separately.

   See the OpenSSH `authorized_keys` manpage for more info on this option.
 - `hostname` and `alias` allow configuring the name(s) that can be used to
   connect to this client. See below for details.

Note that when a client has multiple keys, the first one offered by the client
that is present in the `authorized_keys` file is used, even when another is
also present and has more permissions or other options.

### Server hostnames and aliases
Each connected client has a hostname, and an optional list of alias names. The
hostname is used in various places to refer to a client, while only the aliases 
can be used to select a listening client to connect to.

By default, the username specified by the client is used as its hostname (this
looks a bit like a hack, but it seems like the cleanest approach). Using the
`hostname` option in `authorized_keys`, this hostname can be overridden for a
given connection. Using the `alias` option, additional alias names can be
specified (the option must be specified multiple times for multiple aliases).

When multiple listening clients each claim the same name (hostname or alias),
the last client to connect will be reached using that name. To reach the other
clients, you can add an index to the hostname. E.g. when two listening clients
both use `test` as their hostname, you can connect to the most recent one using
`test` (or `test~0`) and the older one using `test~1`.
<!-- TODO: remove this indexing feature, it's redundant by using random suffixes instead -->

### Connecting listening clients
Connections to the Nuttssh server use the normal SSH protocol, so can use a
regular SSH client. To open up a listening port, the normal port forwarding
options can be used. For example:

    ssh -n user1@nuttssh.example.org -p 2222 -R 6379:localhost:6379

This connects to a Nuttssh server running on `nuttsh.example.org`, port 2222.
Our hostname (`user1`) is passed as the username. Use `-n` so we don't redirect
`stdin` to Nutssh, making it impossible to send to the background (e.g. by 
appending `&` to the command). Upon connecting, a (virtual) port 6379 is opened
on the Nuttssh server, ready for listening.
Nuttssh will print out a command for a listener to connect, something like

    ssh -n user2@nuttssh.example.org -p 2222 -L 6379:user1-a4h5ig8:6379

The listener (user2) will then be able to connect to `localhost:6379` on
user1's machine as if it were running on user2's `localhost:6379`.

Typically you want a listening client to be continuously connected (and
reconnect on errors). This is easy using `autossh`, just replace `ssh` with
`autossh`, and that will take care of autoconnecting.

By default, `autossh` uses additional port forwards to test connectivity, which
do not work with Nuttssh so these should be disabled in favor of letting SSH
itself do keepalive. Additionally, when running unattended, `autossh` should be
told to always keep retrying, even on startup errors.

#### Changing port numbers
The above examples all assume that the listening clients requests a listening
port 6379 and forwards any incoming circuits to `localhost:6379`, which is probably
the common case. However, it is also possible to forward to a different local
host or port by specifying them with the `-R` option.

For example:

    ssh -n user1@nuttsh.example.org -p 2222 -R 9736:localhost:6379

This requests a virtual port 9736 on the Nuttssh server and connects any incoming
circuits to port 6379 on localhost. Note that this is completely invisible to
the initiating clients, since these only need to specify the hostname
(`user1-<suffix>`) and virtual listening port (9736).

### Connecting initiating clients
Initiating clients also use the plain SSH protocol and can use a normal SSH
client. For example, to set up an SSH connection to the listening client from
the previous example, using a circuit through the NuttSSH server:

    ssh -J nuttssh.example.org:2222 user1

This instructs ssh to first connect to `nuttssh.example.org`, port 2222 and
then inside that connection, ask the Nuttssh server to set up a circuit
(tunneled connection) to `user1`, port 22 (not specified explicitly). This
hostname and port combination is then matched by the Nuttssh server to the
previously connected listening client and the circuit is routed to that client.
Finally, the listening client then completes the circuit by locally connecting
to its own SSH port, as requested by the `localhost:22` part in its `-R`
option.

This makes use of the SSH `-J` option, using the Nuttssh as a *jump host*. This
is convenient for routing SSH connections through a circuit, but does not work
for other kinds of connections. Fortunately, ssh allows other ways to set up
these circuit connections as well.

Note that this makes two SSH connections, one to the Nuttsh server and one to
the listening client. This also means that authentication must happen twice.


#### Forwarding stdin/stdout through a circuit
SSH can also forward data on its stdin and stdout streams into a circuit. For
example:

    ssh -W user1:22 nuttssh.example.org -p 2222

This opens a circuit to `user1` on port 22, and connects it to the stdin and
stdout of the local ssh client. The `-N` option is implied by `-W`, so does not
need to be separately specified.

#### Routing a SOCKS proxy requests through a circuit
SSH supports exposing a SOCKS proxy. This proxy is implemented completely in
the local SSH client, and allows (local) programs, such as a webbrowser, to
route all of their traffic through the proxy. In this case, this means all
connections will be made through circuits (and thus connections can be made to
all listening hosts, but not other hosts).

To set this up, run:

    ssh -D 3128 nuttssh.example.org -p 2222 -N

This instructs ssh to open up a SOCKS proxy port on local port 3128, which can
then be used by other programs.

Note that this setup requires the client to support SOCKS v5 and do name
resolution through the proxy (e.g. Firefox has a "Proxy DNS when using SOCKS
v5" optoin for this). Without this (and with SOCKS v4), names are locally
resolved (which will fail) and only the resulting IP address is included in the
proxy request.

### Using ssh config files
All of the above mentioned ssh options (except `-N` it seems) can also be
configured through SSH configuration file options, so you can define some
presets and apply them by just passing a hostname to ssh. See the `ssh_config`
manpage for more info.

# Contributing
This is an open project, and contributions are welcomed. For bug reports,
feature suggestions and questions, please use the github issue tracker. To
contribute patches, use github pull requests.

When contributing patches, make sure to provide good quality contributions. In
particular, code style should be consistent, commits should be cleanly
separated with a single logical change per commit and commit messages should be
clear. In other words, make sure the code and commit history is easy to read
and review. Additionally, please explicitly state that you make your
patch available under the MIT license.

To check the coding style of the code, the flake8 tool is used. As a
convenience, a `Makefile` is provided that allows running `make check` to run
all checks (currently only flake8). This should not return any errors after any
commit, so make sure to run it regularly. To fix import sorting errors, run
`make sort`.

# License (also setup.py)
Nuttssh was written by Matthijs Kooijman. Its sources, as well as the
accompanying documentation and other files in this repository are available
under the MIT license. See the [`LICENSE`](LICENSE) file for the full license text.

# About Nuttssh
Nuttssh was originally created for the [Meetjestad!](http://www.meetjestad.net)
project, to provide lightweight remote control for LoRa gateways spread
throughout the city on varying internet connections (usually not publically
reachable due to NAT). After some initial experiments with a reverse SSH
connection and SSH channel multiplexing (which worked, but resulted in fragile
code), the current approach of using port forwards was implemented. For this,
some inspiration was taking from
[ssh-proxy](https://github.com/luke-jr/ssh-proxy), which also uses remote port
forwarding (but uses key fingerprints to identify clients, and probably
predates the SSH "jump host" feature).

Since how Nuttssh works seems a bit similar to the way telephone switchboards
used to work years ago, Nuttssh is named after Emma & Stella Nutt, which were
the first two female telephone switchboard operators. The name "circuit" is
also taken from telephone jargon.
